feat (curriculum): add oop and encapsulation lectures (#62121)
freeCodeCamp/freeCodeCamp: curriculum/challenges/english/blocks/lecture-understanding-object-oriented-programming-and-encapsulation/68c128cbd77e4ba9ed671937.md

---
id: 68c128cbd77e4ba9ed671937
title: What are Getters and Setters
challengeType: 19
dashedName: what-are-getters-and-setters
---

# --description--

Getters and setters are methods that let you control how the attributes of a class are accessed and modified. With getters you retrieve a value, and with setters you set a value.

> These actions are done through what’s known as properties. They are what what connect getters and setters, and allow access to data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These actions are done through what's known as properties. They are what what connect getters and setters, and allow access to data.
```

Properties act like attributes but behave like methods under the hood. Think of them as data you define like methods, but work like attributes. This means you can access properties with dot notation instead of parentheses or round brackets.

The main thing properties do is that they run extra logic behind the scenes when you get, set, or delete values with them. This makes them the perfect choice when you want to access or manipulate data within objects.

> So why use properties for that instead of methods? It’s mostly about readability and convention. They make your code cleaner and easier to read.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So why use properties for that instead of methods? It's mostly about readability and convention. They make your code cleaner and easier to read.
```

When you use a method, you always have to call it with parentheses. But with a property, you can access it just like a normal attribute using dot notation. That makes your code look simple even when it is doing extra work behind the scenes.

For example, you might want to calculate a value or check that a new value is valid before saving it. Instead of calling a method for that, you can use an attribute-like way to do that.

To create a property, you define a method and place the @property decorator above it. This tells Python to treat the method as a property.

> That takes us to getters. Here’s how to create one with the @property decorator:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That takes us to getters. Here's how to create one with the @property decorator:
```

To make a setter to create the radius, for example, you have to define another method with the same name and use `@<property_name>.setter` above it:

```py
class Circle:
    def __init__(self, radius):
        self._radius = radius

    @property
    def radius(self):  # A getter to get the radius
        return self._radius

    @radius.setter
    def radius(self, value):  # A setter to set the radius
        if value <= 0:
            raise ValueError('Radius must be positive')
        self._radius = value

my_circle = Circle(3)
print('Initial radius:', my_circle.radius) # Initial radius: 3

my_circle.radius = 8
print('After modifying the radius:', my_circle.radius) # After modifying the radius: 8
```

In this example, the radius setter is not just setting the radius for the circle, it's also running a validation that makes sure the radius is not a negative number.

Once you define getters and setters, Python automatically calls them under the hood whenever you use normal attribute syntax:

```py
my_circle.radius # This will call the getter
my_circle.radius = 4 # This will call the setter
```

> Note that inside the setter, you cannot use same name of the property when assigning a new value. That’s because `self.radius = value` will call the setter within the setter method itself, leading to infinite recursion and a `RecursionError`. So you must always use the underscore-prefixed form `self._radius = value`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that inside the setter, you cannot use same name of the property when assigning a new value. That's because `self.radius = value` will call the setter within the setter method itself, leading to infinite recursion and a `RecursionError`. So you must always use the underscore-prefixed form `self._radius = value`.
```

Just like you can control how an attribute is accessed through getter and how it is modified with setter, you can also control how it is deleted using a deleter.

A deleter runs custom logic when you use the del statement on a property. To create one, you use the `@<property_name>.deleter` decorator:

```py
class Circle:
    def __init__(self, radius):
        self._radius = radius

    # Getter
    @property
    def radius(self):
        return self._radius

    # Setter
    @radius.setter
    def radius(self, value):
        if value <= 0:
            raise ValueError("Radius must be positive")
        self._radius = value

    # Deleter
    @radius.deleter
    def radius(self):
        print("Deleting radius...")
        del self._radius
```

> Here’s how the deleter can be put to use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's how the deleter can be put to use:
```
